PUB: Review JOSS paper (#142)
connectomicslab/connectomemapper3: paper/paper.md

---
title: 'Connectome Mapper 3: A Flexible and Open-Source Pipeline Software for Multiscale Multimodal Human Connectome Mapping'
tags:
  - Python
  - connectome
  - multi-scale
  - MRI
  - BIDS
  - BIDS App
  - containerized workflows

>   - nipype

Reviewer: I just went through the tags on JOSS to see what tags people use. It's surprising to see `connectome` or `connectomics` return no results yet.
Maybe `neuroscience` can also be a possible tag to add. It yields some relevant results to our paper: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/search?q=neuroscience
`pipeline` or `workflow` tags can also be added.

Author: Great suggestion

Author: ```suggestion
tags:
  - Python
  - neuroscience
  - pipeline
  - workflow
  - connectome
  - multi-scale
  - MRI
  - BIDS
  - BIDS App
  - containerized workflows
  - nipype
```

authors:
  - name: Sebastien Tourbier
    orcid: 0000-0002-4441-899X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Joan Rue-Queralt
    orcid: 0000-0001-5680-4540
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Katharina Glomb
    orcid: 0000-0002-4596-4386
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Yasser Aleman-Gomez
    orcid: 0000-0001-6067-8639
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Emeline Mullier
    orcid: 0000-0001-6209-0791
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Alessandra Griffa
    orcid: 0000-0003-1923-1653
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Mikkel Schöttner
    orcid: 0000-0002-4521-9837 
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jonathan Wirsich
    orcid: 0000-0003-0588-9710

>     affiliation: 3

Author: Thanks @jwirsich! Will correct my affiliation and try to integrate the most of your very useful feedback ;)

>   - name: Anil Tuncel

Reviewer: Can we put this unicode character ('ı') in my name?
It should be like this
`- name: M. Anıl Tuncel`

In latex it's written as {\i}

Thanks :)

Author: Yes for sure I will see what I can do

   index: 2
 - name: Departement des Neurosciences Cliniques, University of Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 3
 - name: Blue Brain Project, BBP-CORE, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
   index: 4
 - name: Foxight, Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 5
 - name: CIBM Center for Biomedical Imaging, Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 6
date: 02 February 2021
bibliography: paper.bib

# Optional fields if submitting to a AAS journal too, see this blog post:
# https://blog.joss.theoj.org/2018/12/a-new-collaboration-with-aas-publishing
# aas-doi: 10.3847/xxxxx <- update this with the DOI from AAS once you know it.
# aas-journal: Astrophysical Journal <- The name of the AAS journal.
---

# Statement of Need

The field of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Connectomics has rapidly expanded since its advent 
  in the 2000s [@SpornsTheBrain:2005], [@HagmannFromConnectomics:2005], [@SpornsEditorialConnectomics:2018].
It has revolutionized the way to investigate `in-vivo`, `non-invasively` and 
  `safely` at different macroscopic scales the structural and functional systems of the 

>   brain by modeling connections between brain areas as a graph or network, the so-called
>   `connectome`, and has become a widely used method in Neuroscience [@Bassett2017]. 

Author: ```suggestion
  brain by modeling connections between brain areas as a graph or network, the so-called
  `connectome`, and has become a widely used set of methods in Neuroscience [@Bassett2017]. 
```

  by the community of open research practices, which promotes `open data` and `open method`,
  to address these challenges [@Nichols:2017] [@EglenTowardNeuroscience:2017] [@Kennedy2019].
This has led in particular to the creation of a community standard, known as the Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS),
  initially designed to ease the practice of sharing raw MRI data [@GorgolewskiTheExperiments:2016]. 
[@GorgolewskiBIDSMethods:2017].
Combined with advances in software virtualization, BIDS has enabled the creation of the BIDS Apps
  framework which uses software container technology to encapsulate neuroimaging processing pipelines
  and ensure portability and reproducibility.
A large ecosystem of processing pipelines supporting the mapping of connectomes has evolved around this framework,
  including C-PAC [@cpac:2013], NIAK [@BellecNeuroimagingNIAK:2016], fMRIPrep [@Ghosh:2018], dMRIPrep [@dmriprep:2019],
  QSIPREP [@CieslakQSIPrep:2020], MRtrix3_connectome [@Smith2019:BIDSApp], NDMG [@KiarAVariability:2018]
  and PyNets [@PisnerPyNets:2020], which have all demonstrated their capability in addressing all the previously-mentioned
  challenges.

> However, none of the existing solutions provide a direct alternative to Connectome Mapper.

Reviewer 2: Shameless self-citation ;) - Consider adding: 'However, none of the existing solutions provide a direct alternative to Connectome Mapper when dealing with multimodal datasets with the goal to create connectomes.'

Reviewer 2: see also direct competitor to CMP:
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.01.31.478189v1

Author: Thanks for the link @jwirsich ! I will add it to the list. 
```suggestion
However, none of the existing solutions provide a direct alternative to Connectome Mapper
  when dealing with multimodal datasets with the goal to create connectomes at multiple
  scales with hierarchical region grouping.
```

> However, none of the existing solutions provide a direct alternative to Connectome Mapper.

Author: This is quite a challenge to add much more details here as the paper might be already at the limit of the maximal length, and I think the statement of need it already quite long. But, integrating Jonathan's suggestion below can give a little bit more info on how it differs.

  evolve over the years in terms of the underlying codebase, the tools used, and the scope of the functionality
  provided, including the migration to Python 3, a brand-new Lausanne parcellation scheme, the adoption
  of the BIDS standard for data organization, the encapsulation of the processing pipelines in software
  container images, continuously tested in concordance to the BIDS Apps standard, major upgrades of the diffusion and
  fMRI pipelines, and the current extension to Electro-EncephaloGraphy (EEG), initiated during OHBM BrainHack 2020
  ([https://github.com/ohbm/hackathon2020/issues/214](https://github.com/ohbm/hackathon2020/issues/214)).
CMP3 has been designed around different characteristics and principles along which it is summarized
  in this manuscript.

# Summary

\textbf{A flexible and interoperable workflow for multi-modal human connectome mapping.}
Connectome Mapper 3 (CMP3) implements a workflow that creates a hierarchical multi-scale
  connectome representation of the structural and functional brain systems, from any
  sMRI / dMRI / rfMRI dataset structured according to the BIDS standard.

> It relies on Nipype [@GorgolewskiNipype:2011] and adopts a modular architecture.

Author: Fixed by https://github.com/connectomicslab/connectomemapper3/pull/142/files#r798758025

As illustrated by \autoref{fig:cmp3-diagram}, the workflow is composed of three different
  pipelines (anatomical, diffusion, and fMRI) dedicated to the processing of each modality (sMRI, dMRI, rfMRI).

![\textbf{Overview of the Connectome Mapper 3 BIDS App's workflow.}
\label{fig:cmp3-diagram}](cmp3-diagram.png)

Each pipeline is represented by a Nipype workflow that takes a BIDS formatted dataset as input, and
  runs a number of sub-workflows (stages).
Each stage implements one or multiple tasks, where each task can interface with either
  a specific tool including in FSL [@Jenkinson2012FSL], FreeSurfer [@Fischl2012FreeSurfer],
  ANTs [@AVANTS2008SymmetricBrain], dipy [@Garyfallidis2014DipyData],

>   mrtrix3 [@Tournier2019MRtrix3:Visualisation], AFNI [@Cox2012], or with an in-house tool

Reviewer 2: unclear what is meant by inhouse tool: either cite or shortly describe what functions are included

  (\autoref{fig:cmp3-diagram}).

To guarantee consistent processing in large neuroimaging cohorts,
  pipeline and stage parameters can be set by loading pipeline
  configuration files in `.json` format.
Adopting BIDS allows CMP3 to automatically identify the structure of the input data, and to check the
  availability of sMRI, dMRI, rfMRI, and derived data.
Depending on the input data, the processing pipelines and stages are then dynamically built and configured
  based on the parameters set in the different configuration files.

> Empowered by the Nipype workflow engine, the re-execution of the workflow will resume the
>   processing at any stages a change of parameter occurred.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Empowered by the Nipype workflow engine, the re-execution of the workflow will resume the
  processing at the stage where a change of parameter occurred, thus not needing to recompute
  outputs not affected by said parameter change.
```

> To ensure reproducibility and maximize re-usability of the tool, the implemented pipelines are encapsulated
>   in a Docker [@merkeldocker:2014] and a Singularity [@Kurtzer2017Singularity:Compute] software image
>   containers, in concordance to the BIDS App framework [@GorgolewskiBIDSMethods:2017].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To ensure reproducibility and maximize re-usability of the tool, the implemented pipelines are encapsulated
  in Docker [@merkeldocker:2014] and Singularity [@Kurtzer2017Singularity:Compute] software image
  containers, in concordance to the BIDS App framework [@GorgolewskiBIDSMethods:2017].
```

> This means that the BIDS App of CMP3 can be run on a large diversity of datasets on Linux, MacOSX, Windows computers,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that the BIDS App of CMP3 can be run on a large diversity of datasets, on Linux, MacOSX, and Windows computers,
```

  and on high performance computing systems (clusters) for large-scale analysis.

> Design considerations makes CMP3 not only easy to install and use (as it provides the user with a computing

Reviewer: Design considerations makes -> design considerations make

>   environment in which the pipelines are guarantee to run, and where all dependencies

Reviewer: * are guaranteed to run

  are already installed) on a diversity of multi-modal BIDS datasets, but also efficient in managing and

>   scaling the pipeline execution while recording provenance, and easy to customize and extend it for specific needs.

Reviewer 3: A bit unclear which design consideration has which advantage. I would consider listing each design consideration and its respective advantage(s) separately (e.g. containerization: fixed computing environment with all dependencies; modularity: easy customization...)

At the time EEG is being integrated, CMP3 already provides a collection of interfaces dedicated
  for this modality that would allow anyone to map the connectivity derived from EEG in

>   the CMP3 framework, as demonstrated in a tutorial notebook.

Reviewer 3: Link the EEG notebook?

Author: Good spot! Actually it is not existing yet but in preparation! The objective is to have it ready before submission

> \textbf{A revisited and extended multi-scale cortical parcellation scheme.}

Reviewer 2: The Lausanne Parcelation is described in great detail while fMRI and dMRI pipline are barely mentioned. To not create too much work maybe add a little pargraph of 3 sentences that links to the relevant documentation: https://connectome-mapper-3.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bidsappmanager.html#diffusion-pipeline-stages
and
https://connectome-mapper-3.readthedocs.io/en/latest/bidsappmanager.html#fmri-pipeline-stages

> CMP3 revisits the multiscale cortical parcellation proposed by [@Cammoun2012:MappingMRI]
>   and its implementation, and extends with new structures including a subdivision for each
>   brain hemisphere of the thalamus into 7 nuclei, the hippocampus into 12 subfields and the brainstem into
>   4 sub-structures (\autoref{fig:parc}).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CMP3 revisits the multiscale cortical parcellation proposed by [@Cammoun2012:MappingMRI] and extends it with new structures including a subdivision of the thalamus into 7 nuclei per hemisphere, of the hippocampus into 12 subfields, and of the brainstem into
  4 sub-structures (\autoref{fig:parc}).
```

![\textbf{Creation of the new Lausanne2018 Connectome Parcellation.}
\label{fig:parc}](Lausanne2018_parcellation_diagram.png)

The parcellation derived from the Desikan-Killiany atlas [@Desikan2006AnInterest] has been
  made symmetric by projecting the right hemisphere labels to the left hemisphere, matching the
  boundaries of the projected regions of the left hemisphere to the boundaries of the original regions
  of the left hemisphere, applying this transformation to the rest of the scales, and saving
  each parcellation scale in a Freesurfer annotation file.

> After generating the volumetric parcellations from the annotation files, one can now decide or not
>   to perform brainstem parcellation [@Iglesias2015BayesianMRI], hippocampal subfields segmentation [@Iglesias2015AMRI],
>   and / or probabilistic atlas-based segmentation of the thalamic nuclei [@Najdenovska2018In-vivoImaging].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After generating the volumetric parcellations from the annotation files, one can now decide whether
  to perform brainstem parcellation [@Iglesias2015BayesianMRI], hippocampal subfields segmentation [@Iglesias2015AMRI],
  and/or probabilistic atlas-based segmentation of the thalamic nuclei [@Najdenovska2018In-vivoImaging].
```

All segmented structures are combined at the end of process to create the final parcellation nifti image

>   at each scale along with the corresponding label index color mapping file in accordance to the BIDS Derivatives

Reviewer: I may be wrong but "in accordance with the BIDS" sounds more correct to me than "in accordance to the BIDS".

  specifications.

\textbf{A graphical user interface reflecting the workflow structure.}

> CMP3 takes advantage of Traits/TraitsUI framework

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CMP3 takes advantage of the Traits/TraitsUI framework
```

  (\href{http://docs.enthought.com/traits/}{http://docs.enthought.com/traits/}) for building an

>   interactive Graphical User Interface (GUI), to give to pipelines and stages a graphical representation,
>   which is easy to understand and extend.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  interactive Graphical User Interface (GUI), to give to pipelines and stages a graphical representation
  which is easy to understand and extend.
```

> This has enabled the design of a GUI aka `cmpbidsappmanager` (\autoref{fig:gui}) that reflects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This has enabled the design of a GUI which we call the `cmpbidsappmanager` (\autoref{fig:gui}) that reflects
```

It has been designed to guide and support the user in all the steps required to
  perform an analysis (\autoref{fig:gui}).

![\textbf{Graphical User Interface of the Connectome Mapper 3.}
A typical procedure to perform an analysis would consists of
  (a)   the selection of the root directory of the BIDS dataset to be analyzed,
  (b)   the creation/edition of the different pipeline configuration files,
  (c)   the configuration of the BIDS App run and its execution, and
  (d)   the inspection of stage outputs with fsleyes, freeview, mrview, or TrackVis
        depending on the tool involved in the stage.
\label{fig:gui}](cmp3-gui-paper.png)

Each pipeline can be individually configured and executed with the aid of the user-friendly
  GUI and the output of each stage can be visually reviewed, enabling the user to keep
  an eye on the data being processed and easily understand the cause of the problems, change the
  parameters and re-execute when results at a given stage are found not to be satisfactory.
In this way, CMP3 simplifies the creation of connectomes and makes it a straightforward process
  even for users not familiar with Nipype and software container technology.

> Nevertheless, it still fulfils the needs of advanced users in charge of analyzing huge amount of data,

Reviewer: Typo:
analyzing huge amount of data -> analyzing huge amounts of data

OR

analyzing huge amount of data -> analyzing a huge amount of data

  offering them the possibility to tune and save all the parameters in configuration files and create a batch
  job to automatically process all data with the BIDS App.

\textbf{Outputs ready to be consumed in the BIDS ecosystem.}

> CMP3 outputs follow as close as possible the BIDS Derivatives specifications,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CMP3 outputs follow the BIDS Derivatives specifications wherever possible,
```

  which facilitates the sharing of the derivatives in the BIDS App ecosystem,
  and allows the user to easily retrieve any of the files generated by CMP3
  with tools of the BIDS ecosystem such as pybids [@Yarkoni:2019].
However, it introduces a new BIDS entity ``atlas-<atlas_label>`` that is used in combination
  with the ``res-<atlas_scale>`` entity to distinguish imaging and network data derived
  from different parcellation atlases and scales.
While the BIDS-Derivatives extension to organize network data is being developed, in which we
  are actively participating, both structural and functional connectomes generated with CMP3 are
  saved by default as graph edge lists in ``.tsv`` files, that can be directly analyzed using

>   the \href{https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/tutorial.html}{NetworkX}, a Python library which

Reviewer 2: @inproceedings{paper:hagberg:2008,
  added-at = {2008-09-24T13:11:32.000+0200},
  address = {Pasadena, CA USA},
  author = {Hagberg, Aric A. and Schult, Daniel A. and Swart, Pieter J.},
  biburl = {https://www.bibsonomy.org/bibtex/272096c6553d7057409fe78ca698eb332/mschuber},
  booktitle = {Proceedings of the 7th Python in Science Conference},
  editor = {Varoquaux, Ga\"el and Vaught, Travis and Millman, Jarrod},
  interhash = {7a78aca0e0e5adfc4d7e882e4635435f},
  intrahash = {72096c6553d7057409fe78ca698eb332},
  keywords = {2008 analysis network python tool},
  pages = {11 - 15},
  timestamp = {2008-09-24T13:11:32.000+0200},
  title = {Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics, and Function using NetworkX},
  url = {http://conference.scipy.org/proceedings/SciPy2008/paper_2/},
  year = 2008
}

>   the \href{https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/tutorial.html}{NetworkX}, a Python library which

Author: ```suggestion
  the \href{https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/tutorial.html}{NetworkX} [@Hagberg:2008], a Python library which
```

  offers many algorithms and tools to explore graphs and compute local and global network properties.

> Connectivity matrices exported to Matlab as MAT-files and fed to the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Connectivity matrices exported to Matlab as MAT-files can be fed to the
```

>   \href{www.brain-connectivity-toolbox.net}{Brain Connectivity Toolbox}, which is a powerful

Author: ```suggestion
  \href{www.brain-connectivity-toolbox.net}{Brain Connectivity Toolbox} [@Rubinov:2010], which is a powerful
```

  toolbox containing a large selection of network measures for the characterization of brain
  connectivity datasets.
Finally, connectomes can be saved in GraphML format to interface with a lot of general purpose

>   software packages for graph analysis such as \href{www.cytoscape.org}{Cytoscape} or \href{www.gephi.org}{Gephi}.

Author: ```suggestion
  software packages for graph analysis such as \href{www.cytoscape.org}{Cytoscape} [@Shannon:2003] [@Gustavsen:2019] or \href{www.gephi.org}{Gephi} [@Bastian:2009].
```

> Not only this ensures that the connectome files can be opened by
>   the most popular software packages used in this field to perform complex network
>   analyzes, but also this eases the reuse of all outputs in the BIDS ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Structuring outputs as BIDS Derivatives and saving them in a range of file formats
  thus has a lot of advantages. Not only does it ensure that the connectome files can 
  be opened by the most popular software packages used in this field to perform complex 
  network analyzes, but it also eases the reuse of all outputs in the BIDS ecosystem.
```

\textbf{Developed with openness, transparency, and good practices in mind.}
CMP3 is published under the terms of the open source 3-Clause Berkeley Software
  Distribution (3-Clause BSD) license, which allows unlimited modification, redistribution

>   and commercial use in source and binary forms as long as its copyright notices, and the

Reviewer 3: What do you mean by "as long as its copyright notices"?

Author: ```suggestion
  and commercial use in source and binary forms, as long as the copyright notice is retained and the
```

  license's disclaimers of warranty are maintained.
The source code for CMP3 is hosted at

>   [https://github.com/sebastientourbier/connectomemapper3](https://github.com/sebastientourbier/connectomemapper3),

Reviewer: @sebastientourbier is the github page https://github.com/connectomicslab/connectomemapper3 or https://github.com/sebastientourbier/connectomemapper3?

Author: Good spot

  where all bugs and contributions are transparently discussed and managed through issues, and each release is
  archived to Zenodo [@ZenodoCMP:2021].
In case of problems, CMP3 has a dedicated forum at
  [groups.google.com/group/cmtk-users](groups.google.com/group/cmtk-users) where a

>   community of users is active to support and have scientific discussions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  community of users is active to support each other and have scientific discussions.
```

To be robust to adverse code changes, versions are released through continuous integration building
  and testing.
Specifically, this involves testing the installation of the python package, the build of
  the Docker and Singularity container images, and the execution of the BIDS App via the different container
  images adopting multiple pipeline configurations, using a sample multi-modal MRI dataset [@Tourbier2020SampleDataset]
  that has been created for this purpose.

> Doing so, we can guarantee the full functionality of each new released version of CMP3.

Reviewer: Again I'm not sure but
"functionality of each new**ly** released" sounds more correct to me

> Doing so, we can guarantee the full functionality of each newly released version of CMP3.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Doing so, we can guarantee the full functionality of each newly released version of CMP3
  for a range of different use cases.
```

More details about CMP3, the different processing steps and generated outputs together with

>   installation and usage instructions, and different tutorials supporting the analysis,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  installation and usage instructions, different tutorials supporting the analysis,
```

  and the interpretation of the generated outputs with popular tools, can be found in
  the documentation ([connectome-mapper-3.readthedocs.io](connectome-mapper-3.readthedocs.io))
  that is kept up to date with the current release and can be retrieved for older versions.

# Mention

CMP3 has been successfully employed in a number of methodological
  [@Zheng2020GeometricConnectomeb] [@GlombNeuro:2020] [@GlombNet:2020] [@AkselrodHBM:2021]
  [@RueQueraltNeuro:2021] [@PascucciNet:2021], clinical [@Carboni2019TheOutcome] 
  [@Vorderwulbecke2020High-densityPoint] [@CarboniNeuro:2020], and data [@Pascucci2022]
  research articles.
CMP3 is also part of [`ReproNim/containers`](https://github.com/ReproNim/containers),

>   a Datalad dataset with a collection of containerized 40 popular neuroimaging research pipelines,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  a Datalad dataset with a collection of 40 popular containerized neuroimaging research pipelines,
```

  - name: Sebastien Tourbier
    orcid: 0000-0002-4441-899X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Joan Rue-Queralt
    orcid: 0000-0001-5680-4540
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Katharina Glomb
    orcid: 0000-0002-4596-4386
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Yasser Aleman-Gomez
    orcid: 0000-0001-6067-8639
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Emeline Mullier
    orcid: 0000-0001-6209-0791
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Alessandra Griffa
    orcid: 0000-0003-1923-1653
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Mikkel Schöttner
    orcid: 0000-0002-4521-9837 
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jonathan Wirsich
    orcid: 0000-0003-0588-9710
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Anıl Tuncel
    orcid: 0000-0003-0317-2556
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Jakub Jancovic
    orcid: 0000-0002-3312-3918
    affiliation: 5
  - name: Meritxell Bach Cuadra
    affiliation: 3,6
    orcid: 0000-0003-2730-4285
  - name: Patric Hagmann
    orcid: 0000-0002-2854-6561
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Radiology Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne (CHUV-UNIL), Switzerland
   index: 1
 - name: Medical Image Processing Lab (MIP:Lab), Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
   index: 2

>  - name: Departement des Neurosciences Cliniques, University of Geneva, Switzerland

Author: ```suggestion
 - name: EEG and Epilepsy Unit, University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine of Geneva, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
```

---
title: 'Connectome Mapper 3: A Flexible and Open-Source Pipeline Software for Multiscale Multimodal Human Connectome Mapping'
tags:
  - Python
  - neuroscience
  - pipeline
  - workflow
  - connectome
  - multi-scale
  - MRI
  - BIDS
  - BIDS App
  - containerized workflows
  - nipype
authors:
  - name: Sebastien Tourbier
    orcid: 0000-0002-4441-899X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Joan Rue-Queralt
    orcid: 0000-0001-5680-4540
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Katharina Glomb
    orcid: 0000-0002-4596-4386
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Yasser Aleman-Gomez
    orcid: 0000-0001-6067-8639
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Emeline Mullier
    orcid: 0000-0001-6209-0791
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Alessandra Griffa
    orcid: 0000-0003-1923-1653
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Mikkel Schöttner
    orcid: 0000-0002-4521-9837 
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jonathan Wirsich
    orcid: 0000-0003-0588-9710
    affiliation: 3

>   - name: Anıl Tuncel

Reviewer: To be consistent with my other publications, can you add also the initial for my first name?

```M. Anıl Tuncel```

Thanks

    orcid: 0000-0003-0317-2556
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Jakub Jancovic
    orcid: 0000-0002-3312-3918
    affiliation: 5
  - name: Meritxell Bach Cuadra
    affiliation: 3,6
    orcid: 0000-0003-2730-4285
  - name: Patric Hagmann
    orcid: 0000-0002-2854-6561
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Radiology Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne (CHUV-UNIL), Switzerland
   index: 1
 - name: Medical Image Processing Lab (MIP:Lab), Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
   index: 2
 - name: EEG and Epilepsy Unit, University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine of Geneva, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 3

>  - name: Blue Brain Project, BBP-CORE, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland

Reviewer: Hi @sebastientourbier the affiliation is approved. Here's the correct wording below
```
 Blue Brain Project, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Campus Biotech, Geneva, Switzerland
```

---
title: 'Connectome Mapper 3: A Flexible and Open-Source Pipeline Software for Multiscale Multimodal Human Connectome Mapping'
tags:
  - Python
  - neuroscience
  - pipeline
  - workflow
  - connectome
  - multi-scale
  - MRI
  - BIDS
  - BIDS App
  - containerized workflows
  - nipype
authors:
  - name: Sebastien Tourbier
    orcid: 0000-0002-4441-899X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Joan Rue-Queralt
    orcid: 0000-0001-5680-4540
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Katharina Glomb
    orcid: 0000-0002-4596-4386

>     affiliation: 1

Reviewer 4: My current affiliation is Charite (see below)
```suggestion
    affiliation: 8
```

    affiliation: 4
  - name: M. Anıl Tuncel
    orcid: 0000-0003-0317-2556
    affiliation: 5
  - name: Jakub Jancovic
    orcid: 0000-0002-3312-3918
    affiliation: 6
  - name: Meritxell Bach Cuadra
    affiliation: 1,7
    orcid: 0000-0003-2730-4285
  - name: Patric Hagmann
    orcid: 0000-0002-2854-6561
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Radiology Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne (CHUV-UNIL), Switzerland
   index: 1
 - name: Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Division of Neurology, Geneva University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 2
 - name: Institute of Bioengineering, Center of Neuroprosthetics, École Polytechnique Fédérale De Lausanne (EPFL), Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 3
 - name: EEG and Epilepsy Unit, University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine of Geneva, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 4
 - name: Blue Brain Project, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Campus Biotech, Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 5
 - name: Foxight, Geneva, Switzerland
   index: 6
 - name: CIBM Center for Biomedical Imaging, Geneva, Switzerland

>    index: 7

Reviewer 4: My current affiliation
```suggestion
   index: 7
   - name: Berlin Institute of Health at Charité; Department of Neurology with Experimental Neurology, Brain Simulation Section, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany
   index: 8
```

  and ensures portability and reproducibility [@GorgolewskiBIDSMethods:2017].
A large ecosystem of processing pipelines supporting the mapping of connectomes has evolved around this framework,
  including C-PAC [@cpac:2013], NIAK [@BellecNeuroimagingNIAK:2016], fMRIPrep [@Ghosh:2018], dMRIPrep [@dmriprep:2019],
  QSIPREP [@CieslakQSIPrep:2020], MRtrix3_connectome [@Smith2019:BIDSApp], NDMG [@KiarAVariability:2018]
  PyNets [@PisnerPyNets:2020], and Micapipe [@Rodriguez:2022] which have all demonstrated their capability in
  addressing all the previously-mentioned challenges.
However, none of the existing solutions provide a direct alternative to Connectome Mapper
  when dealing with multimodal datasets with the goal to create connectomes at multiple
  scales with hierarchical region grouping.

Connectome Mapper (CMP), an open-source pipeline software with a graphical user interface,
  was created before the emergence of BIDS to simplify the organization, processing, and analysis of
  sMRI, dMRI, and rfMRI from raw data to multi-scale structural weighted and functional
  connectomes [@Daducci:2012], using in a common framework a multi-scale extension of

>   the Desikan-Killiany parcellation [@Desikan2006AnInterest][@Cammoun2012:MappingMRI].

Reviewer 4: Some version of this sentence should imo be at the very beginning of the paper. Right now, people read two full paragraphs before cmp is mentioned.

  interactive Graphical User Interface (GUI), to give to pipelines and stages a graphical representation
  which is easy to understand and extend.
This has enabled the design of a GUI which we call the `cmpbidsappmanager` (\autoref{fig:gui}) that reflects
  the modular structure of the processing workflow.
It has been designed to guide and support the user in all the steps required to
  perform an analysis (\autoref{fig:gui}).

![\textbf{Graphical User Interface of the Connectome Mapper 3.}
A typical procedure to perform an analysis would consists of
  (a)   the selection of the root directory of the BIDS dataset to be analyzed,
  (b)   the creation/edition of the different pipeline configuration files,
  (c)   the configuration of the BIDS App run and its execution, and
  (d)   the inspection of stage outputs with fsleyes, freeview, mrview, or TrackVis
        depending on the tool involved in the stage.
\label{fig:gui}](cmp3-gui-paper.png)

Each pipeline can be individually configured and executed with the aid of the user-friendly
  GUI and the output of each stage can be visually reviewed, enabling the user to keep

>   an eye on the data being processed and easily understand the cause of the problems, change the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  an eye on the data being processed and easily identify the cause of any problems, change the
```

  offering them the possibility to tune and save all the parameters in configuration files and create a batch
  job to automatically process all data with the BIDS App.

\textbf{Outputs ready to be reused in the BIDS ecosystem.}
CMP3 outputs follow the BIDS Derivatives specifications wherever possible,
  which facilitates the sharing of the derivatives in the BIDS App ecosystem,
  and allows the user to easily retrieve any of the files generated by CMP3
  with tools of the BIDS ecosystem such as pybids [@Yarkoni:2019].
It introduces a new BIDS entity ``atlas-<atlas_label>`` (See [proposal](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/997))
  that is used in combination with the ``res-<atlas_scale>`` entity to distinguish imaging and network data derived
  from different parcellation atlases and scales.
While the BIDS-Derivatives extension to organize network data is being developed, in which we
  are actively participating, both structural and functional connectomes generated with CMP3 are
  saved by default as graph edge lists in ``.tsv`` files, that can be directly analyzed using

>   the \href{https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/tutorial.html}{NetworkX} [@Hagberg:2008], a Python library which

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  \href{https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/tutorial.html}{NetworkX} [@Hagberg:2008], a Python library which
```

  offers many algorithms and tools to explore graphs and compute local and global network properties.
Connectivity matrices exported to Matlab as MAT-files can be fed to the
  \href{www.brain-connectivity-toolbox.net}{Brain Connectivity Toolbox} [@Rubinov:2010], which is a powerful
  toolbox containing a large selection of network measures for the characterization of brain
  connectivity datasets.
Finally, connectomes can be saved in GraphML format to interface with a lot of general purpose
  software packages for graph analysis such as \href{www.cytoscape.org}{Cytoscape} [@Shannon:2003] [@Gustavsen:2019] or \href{www.gephi.org}{Gephi} [@Bastian:2009].
Structuring outputs as BIDS Derivatives and saving them in a range of file formats
  thus has a lot of advantages. Not only does it ensure that the connectome files can 
  be opened by the most popular software packages used in this field to perform complex 

>   network analyzes, but it also eases the reuse of all outputs in the BIDS ecosystem.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  network analyses, but it also eases the reuse of all outputs in the BIDS ecosystem.
```

  installation and usage instructions, different tutorials supporting the analysis,
  and the interpretation of the generated outputs with popular tools, can be found in
  the documentation ([connectome-mapper-3.readthedocs.io](connectome-mapper-3.readthedocs.io))
  that is kept up to date with the current release and can be retrieved for older versions.

# Mention

CMP3 has been successfully employed in a number of methodological
  [@Zheng2020GeometricConnectomeb] [@GlombNeuro:2020] [@GlombNet:2020] [@AkselrodHBM:2021]
  [@RueQueraltNeuro:2021] [@PascucciNet:2021], clinical [@Carboni2019TheOutcome] 
  [@Vorderwulbecke2020High-densityPoint] [@CarboniNeuro:2020] [@Carboni:2022], and data [@Pascucci2022]
  research articles.
CMP3 is also part of [`ReproNim/containers`](https://github.com/ReproNim/containers),
  a Datalad dataset with a collection of 40 popular containerized neuroimaging research pipelines,
  which allows one to easily include it as a subdataset within Datalad-controlled BIDS datasets,
  and achieve fully reproducible analysis by running CMP3 directly with Datalad.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation Sinergia

>   [grant no. 170873](https://p3.snf.ch/project-170873).

Reviewer: Hi @sebastientourbier could you add the BBP funding statement as well?

This work was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation Sinergia
  [grant no. 170873](https://p3.snf.ch/project-170873).  M. Anıl Tuncel's involvement was supported by funding to the Blue Brain Project, a research center of the École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), from the Swiss government’s ETH Board of the Swiss Federal Institutes of Technology.

Author: Done 👍

  installation and usage instructions, different tutorials supporting the analysis,
  and the interpretation of the generated outputs with popular tools, can be found in
  the documentation ([connectome-mapper-3.readthedocs.io](connectome-mapper-3.readthedocs.io))
  that is kept up to date with the current release and can be retrieved for older versions.

# Mention

CMP3 has been successfully employed in a number of methodological
  [@Zheng2020GeometricConnectomeb] [@GlombNeuro:2020] [@GlombNet:2020] [@AkselrodHBM:2021]
  [@RueQueraltNeuro:2021] [@PascucciNet:2021], clinical [@Carboni2019TheOutcome] 
  [@Vorderwulbecke2020High-densityPoint] [@CarboniNeuro:2020] [@Carboni:2022], and data [@Pascucci2022]
  research articles.
CMP3 is also part of [`ReproNim/containers`](https://github.com/ReproNim/containers),
  a Datalad dataset with a collection of 40 popular containerized neuroimaging research pipelines,
  which allows one to easily include it as a subdataset within Datalad-controlled BIDS datasets,
  and achieve fully reproducible analysis by running CMP3 directly with Datalad.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation Sinergia

>   [grant no. 170873](https://p3.snf.ch/project-170873).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  [grant no. 170873](https://p3.snf.ch/project-170873).
  Katharina Glomb's involvement was also supported by DFG Priority Program "SPP DBS RI 2073/10-2". 
```
